While bicyclists can legally use most streets, rarely are streets accommodating to bicyclists with adequate infrastructure or other traffic countermeasures. Often, there is a sparse patchwork of isolated bicycle “friendly” streets in an urban network, severely limiting potential bicycle ridership across the network. Current industry standard tools for evaluating bicycle level of service are generally microscopic in approach, focusing on individual intersections or segments. There is a need to equip practitioners with a tool and methodology to evaluate an entire bicycle network effectiveness that is generalizable across different locations. This research aims to resolve that by combining mathematical functions from graph theory with knowledge regarding general preferences and behavior of bicyclists into a methodology for measuring bicycle network effectiveness in a study area. The study tested simple to advanced graph theories and ranked the algorithms to measure network connectivity. The analysis indicates that weighted Shortest path graph algorithms: Low-stress Vs. Motor networks (LMN) and Bicycle facilities Vs. Motor Networks (BMN) algorithms provide a solid understanding of the connectivity compared to simple and advanced graph theories. We split the network with census tracts to make the algorithms economic. We classified network connectivity into five grades (poor, fair, well, very well, and excellent) based on the connectivity score threshold. This study used nine Bay Area counties, Davis, Sacramento, and Hayward cities OpenStreetMap from California to test the algorithms. All bay area counties are poorly connected through designated bicycle facilities, and most of the network is broken or does not have a continuous connection with bicycle facilities. However, more than two-thirds of the census tract network in the Bay area counties are excellently interconnected with a low-stress network.  Davis City is excellently connected through Bicycle facilities. However, 50% of the census tract network in Davis city has poor connectivity due to the presence of high-stress link blocks within the census tract network. Sacramento city is less connected than any bay area county in LMN connectivity due to a disconnected network within the census tract by high-stress links block. The developed methods/tool will help planners, engineers, and policymakers with the ability to efficiently evaluate bicycle networks.

 Keywords: Connectivity, Bicycle, Network, Graph, Level of Traffic Stress, Slope, and Shortest Path

